---
title: "PMRF Annual review: 2021"
description: "Himadree Das, Roll: 196152003, Indian Institute of Technology, Guwahati"
date: 2021-11-13T17:53:30+05:30
draft: False
---

Since the last semester progress seminar on 28th July 2021, I have made efforts to make progress in two topics mainly. I did a collaboration work with my senior, on Synthesis of highly fluorescent, amine-functionalized carbon dots, for the 2nd pertaining to my thesis work, I have been developing  along with my thesis work, Graphene oxide and Chitosan-based conjugated polymeric nanocomposite for the effective adsorption of heavy metal and ions and pharmaceutical contaminants in water resources. 

## Synthesis of highly fluorescent, amine-functionalized carbon dots from biotin-modified chitosan and silk-fibroin blend for target-specific delivery of antitumor agents
**Introduction:** Carbon dots (CDs) are quasi-spherical particles having a diameter of less than 10 nanometres. They usually have a sp2 conjugated core and a sufficient amount of oxygen in the form of carboxyl, hydroxyl, and aldehyde groups, as well as other oxygen-containing species[^1], they are fluorescent nanoparticle that may range from blue to near-infrared, making them a perfect choice for bioimaging, smart sensing systems. 2 They possess multiple functions ranging from cancer cell imaging, therapeutic drug tracking, biosensing, photoluminescence. The traditional fluorescence agents are toxic in nature. The naturally synthesised carbon dots are biocompatible, biodegradable, nontoxic, water soluble easy to synthesize and has high photoluminescence. 3

**Methodology:** The CDs were synthesized by pyrolysis of LMWC and SF blend using five different ratios of LMWC to SF viz. 1:0, 1:0.66, 1:1, 1:1.5, and 0:1. The BT-NHS ester was synthesized using a reported protocol with minor modifications. We have synthesized biotin-conjugated carbon dots (BT-CDs) and 5-FU is encapsulated on the BT-CDs, presumably through the interaction of the hydrophilic 5-FU with the free amino and hydroxyl groups on the surface of the CDs. Encapsulation efficiency (EE %) and drug loading efficiency (DL %) measured using UV–Vis spectroscopic technique. Physical properties of CD’s were evaluated by using FETEM analysis, powder XRD. FTIR spectroscopy was done to check the biotin conjugation and drug attachment. The formation of BT-NHS was further investigated by electrospray ionization-mass spectrometry (ESI-MS). The in vitro drug release from the FU-BT-CDs was carried out in a PBS buffer of 7.4 pH. MTT assay was performed for cytotoxicity determination. The cell imaging was performed to check the efficiency of the synthesized CDs as a cell imaging tool and for the visual evaluation of targeting efficiency.2

**Progress made:** We have successfully synthesized a primary amine-functionalized carbon dot from LMWC and silk fibroin blend. The synthesized CDs were quasi-spherical shaped and has a narrow particle size of 3 ± 1.5 nm. Here, LMWC and silk fibroin acts as primary carbon source and nitrogen doping source, respectively. The formulated carbon dot possesses high fluorescence properties and has a high quantum yield compared to the blank LMWC and SF. It has been observed that, upon the incorporation of the SF, there is an increase in the material's fluorescence properties, which may be because of nitrogen doping. The XRD analysis revealed that the synthesized CDs were of amorphous in nature, it has looses its crystallinity upon carbonization. The anticancer drug 5-fluorouracil is successfully loaded into the material with a very high encapsulation efficiency. Another cancer biomarker biotin is conjugated over the surface of the carbon dot successfully. The MTT assays were performed in three cell lines MCF-7, HeLa and normal HEK-296 cell lines, the IC50 values of native drug are low compared to the synthesised material with IC50 values 28.19, 38.18 and 138.10 respectively. This is because of the abundant number of free primary amine groups, destabilizing the negatively charged protein on the cancerous cell membrane. The confocal imaging studies were done in cancerous cell line MCF-7 for BT-CD.  It shows bright blue colour fluorescence because of the successful internalization of the Biotin conjugated CD due to the presence of biotin receptor over the surface of the cancer cell line.2


## Graphene oxide and chitosan-based conjugated polymeric nanocomposite for the effective adsorption of heavy metal ions in water resources
**Introduction:** The water crisis is the biggest of all risks. Public concern over the environmental impact of wastewater pollution has increased. Due to rapid urbanisation and industrialization, various industries such as, pharmaceuticals, metal smelting, paper making, pesticides, petroleum and refineries are implicated in water pollution. The discharge of industrial effluents contains various organic and inorganic pollutants like heavy metals. An element can be considered as a heavy metal if its relative atomic number is high and specific density is greater than 5gm/cm3, they are of natural origin, mainly found in earth’s crust. Because of their bioavailability and toxicity, as well as the possibility of entering the human food chain directly or indirectly, their presence in surface water poses a threat to aquatic ecosystems and human beings.4 The proper removal of heavy metals is of great concern around the world. Because of its versatility, extensive applicability, economic feasibility, and ease of operation, adsorption is the most promising among them.5

**Methodology:** We have developed a Cysteine and EDTA functionalized Graphene oxide and chitosan nanocomposite for heavy metal adsorption process. We have synthesized graphene oxide by chemical oxidation of graphite powder by modified hummers method with some minor modifications. And then graphene oxide and chitosan were activated by EDC-NHS for the formation of amide bond. Accordingly, EDTA and FMOC-Cysteine conjugation was done by the same method, EDC-NHS coupling reaction. Physical properties of the synthesized composite (GO-CS-EDTA-Cys) were evaluated by using FETEM analysis, crystallinity and phases were analysed by XRD spectroscopy. The structural morphology was characterised by FESEM. FTIR and RAMAN spectroscopy were done to check the formation of graphene oxide. 

**Progress done:** In this work EDTA and cysteine functionalized graphene oxide-chitosan composites were successfully synthesized using modified hummers method. Characterization results showed that EDTA and cysteine were successfully grafted on to the surface of Graphene oxide and Chitosan. 
Future prospects: Batch adsorption studies should be carried out to evaluate the adsorption performance of synthesized EDTA and cysteine functionalized CS-GO composite. Adsorption’s kinetics, Adsorption thermodynamics, Desorption behaviour and influence of external factors like pH, temperature, ionic strength and adsorbent dosage etc. should be carried out to understand the interaction between adsorbate and adsorbent and its interaction rate.


### References
[^1]: Bajpai, S. K., D’Souza, A. & Suhail, B. Carbon dots from Guar Gum: Synthesis, characterization and preliminary in vivo application in plant cells. Mater. Sci. Eng. B 241, 92–99 (2019).
